README.md, before:

# Gradle plugin for enforcing test naming convention.

A gradle plugin that provides a way to automatically change test method
names based on `@DisplayName` annotation, as well as doing opposite - automatically generate
`@DisplayName` based on test method name.

![gif demo of testkonvence plugin](https://github.com/varlanv/doc-resources/raw/refs/heads/main/test-konvence-animation.gif)

## Motivation

Writing clear, descriptive tests is crucial for maintainable software. Many modern testing frameworks, like those
commonly found in Scala, JavaScript, or Groovy, allow developers the convenience of defining test names using flexible,
readable strings. While JUnit 5's `@DisplayName` annotation brings this capability to Java, it can
introduce a new challenge: keeping the underlying Java method name consistent with the human-readable `@DisplayName`.

This plugin aims to solve several common pain points:

* **Synchronization Headaches:** When you update a test's description in `@DisplayName`, it's easy to overlook renaming
  the corresponding Java method. This can lead to confusing mismatches where test reports show one name, while the code
  refers to another. Similarly, if the method name is refactored, the `@DisplayName` can become outdated.
* **Team Inconsistency:** Without a clear convention, different team members might adopt varying styles for naming tests
  or utilizing (or neglecting) `@DisplayName`. This can lead to an inconsistent test suite that's harder to navigate and
  understand.
* **Focus on Readability, Not Just Rules:** Developers should be empowered to write highly descriptive, sentence-like
  test names using `@DisplayName`. The concern of manually creating a compliant Java method name, or keeping it
  synchronized, can be a distraction.

`test-konvence` addresses these issues by automating the synchronization between your test method names and their
`@DisplayName` annotations. It allows your team to:

* **Enforce a consistent naming strategy** across all JUnit 5 tests.
* **Treat `@DisplayName` as the primary, human-readable identifier** for your tests.
* **Forget about manual method name adjustments** – the plugin ensures method names are automatically generated or
  updated to reflect the `@DisplayName`.

## Usage

For the most basic use-case, apply the plugin:

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.varlanv.test-konvence") version "1.0.4"
}
```

The plugin will add two tasks:

1. **testKonvenceApply** - task for changing test method names to match JUnit `@DisplayName` annotation,
   and generate `@DisplayName` annotation based on method name where it doesn't yet exist.
2. **testKonvenceVerify** - task for failing build in case there are tests, for which
   test name transformation is not yet applied, either method name to `@DisplayName`, or `@DisplayName` to method name.

The plugin will also configure automatic applying of `testKonvenceApply` task after each test run.

Consider following test class:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

After running `test` task, or running `testKonvenceApply` task, two things will be added:

1. If not already present, `import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName` import will be added
2. `@DisplayName` will be generated from test name.

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word hello")
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

Now, consider this test class:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word 'hello'")
    void should_work() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

After running `test` task, or running `testKonvenceApply` task,
since there is mismatch between what method name and what is written in `@DisplayName`,
the class will be rewritten to following:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word 'hello'")
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

## Usage example for CI/CD pipelines

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.varlanv.test-konvence") version "1.0.4"
}

testKonvence {
    applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask(!providers.environmentVariable("CI").isPresent())
}
```

Then, somewhere in CI / CD configuration, add a step:
`./gradlew testKonvenceVerify`.

Configuring a plugin like this will make it so that developers will
have nice developer experience on local machines, with test naming
enforced on each test run. Meanwhile, the CI / CD pipeline will enforce that
test naming is always consistent and will fail the build in case a developer forgot to
apply test naming transformations.

## Configurations

Here is an exhaustive list of available configurations:

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
testKonvence {
    enabled(true)
    applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask(true)
    useCamelCaseForMethodNames(false)
    reverseTransformation {
        enabled(true)
    }
}
```

* **enabled** - whether to apply plugin logic. If set to **false**,
  tasks `testKonvenceApply` and `testKonvenceVerify`
  will still be created, but will have no-op action. Default is **true**.
* **applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask** - if set to **true**, all tests will be
  automatically renamed(if needed) after `test` task. If set to **false**,
  applying test naming transformations will be available only through `testKonvenceApply` task.
  Default is **true**.
* **useCamelCaseForMethodNames** - if is to **true**, camel case method names will be used,
  instead of the default snake case. Default is **false**.
* **reverseTransformation.enabled** - if set to **true**, `@DisplayName` annotation will be
  generated based on test method name. If set to **false**, only method name transformations
  based on existing `@DisplayName` annotations will be applied. Default is **true**.

## Transformations examples

#### `@DisplayName` to snake case method name:

* **a_b_c** → _a_b_c_
* **Some good test name** → _some_good_test_name_
* **Some good test name, which has comas, dots., question? marks, and exclamation
  marks!** → _some_good_test_name_which_has_comas_dots_question_marks_and_exclamation_marks_
* **Some123good456test789name0** → _some123good456test789name0_

#### Snake case method name to `@DisplayName`:

* _when_something_then_should_something_ → **when something then should something**
* _when_call_someMethod_then_should_something_ → **when call 'someMethod' then should something**
* _someMethod_should_do_something_ → **'someMethod' should do something**
* ____someMethod___shouldDo___someThing___ → **'someMethod' 'shouldDo' 'someThing'**

## Implementation details

The plugin is working by adding an annotation processor that looks for JUnit annotations,
such as `@Test` `@ParameterizedTest`, `@DisplayName`, etc.

Information collected by the annotation processor is later used to enforce test naming
convention by looking for corresponding tests source files, looking for corresponding test
methods in source files, and applying necessary changes(if any).

Such implementation has two key points as a result:

1. The overhead added by running `testKonvenceApply` after each test run is absolutely minimal.
   No additional compilation or AST tree parsing and manipulation is done. If all of your tests
   already have stable test naming, and you introduce a new test method, only this test class and method
   will be processed.
2. If your test source file is not formatted according
   to [Java Code Conventions](https://www.oracle.com/docs/tech/java/codeconventions.pdf),
   the consistency and correctness of generated changes is not guaranteed.

## Gradle optimizations support

The plugin is built to support all the major Gradle optimization features, such as:

* [Parallel builds](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/performance.html#parallel_execution)
* [Build cache](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_cache.html)
* [Configuration cache](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/configuration_cache.html)
* [Isolated projects](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/isolated_projects.html)

## Known limitations

- Java version 11 or above for compiling test sources is required
- Currently, only JUnit 5 is supported
- The plugin was tested with the latest Gradle 8x and 7x versions (8.14.1, 7.6.1). Any other version is not
  guaranteed to work, but in general, any version in range 7.6.1 - 8.x.x should work.

## License

Test-konvence plugin is open source software and released under [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

- Updated readme - Fixed automatic applying of test name transformations on CI server

README.md, after:

# Gradle plugin for enforcing test naming convention.

A Gradle plugin that provides a way to automatically change test method
names based on `@DisplayName` annotation, as well as doing opposite - automatically generate
`@DisplayName` based on test method name.

![gif demo of testkonvence plugin](https://github.com/varlanv/doc-resources/raw/refs/heads/main/test-konvence-animation.gif)

## Motivation

Many modern testing frameworks, like those commonly found in Scala, JavaScript, or Groovy,
allow developers the convenience of defining test names using flexible,
readable strings. While JUnit 5's `@DisplayName` annotation brings this capability to Java, it can
introduce a new challenge: keeping the underlying Java method name consistent with the human-readable `@DisplayName`.
Because of this, in many real projects, developers completely ignore `@DisplayName` and describe test cases only
with method name.

This plugin aims to solve several common pain points:

* **Synchronization Headaches:** When you update a test's description in `@DisplayName`, it's easy to overlook renaming
  the corresponding Java method. This can lead to confusing mismatches where test reports show one name, while the code
  refers to another. Similarly, if the method name is refactored, the `@DisplayName` can become outdated.
* **Team Inconsistency:** Without a clear convention, different team members might adopt varying styles for naming tests
  or using (or neglecting) `@DisplayName`. This can lead to an inconsistent test suite that's harder to navigate and
  understand.
* **Focus on Readability, Not Just Rules:** Developers should be empowered to write highly descriptive, sentence-like
  test names using `@DisplayName`. The concern of manually creating a compliant Java method name, or keeping it
  synchronized, can be a distraction.

`test-konvence` plugin addresses these issues by automating the synchronization between your test method names and their
`@DisplayName` annotations. It allows your team to:

* **Enforce a consistent naming strategy** across all JUnit 5 tests.
* **Treat `@DisplayName` as source of truth and the primary, human-readable identifier** for your tests.
* **Forget about manual method name adjustments** – the plugin ensures method names are automatically generated or
  updated to reflect the `@DisplayName`.

## Usage

For the most basic use-case, apply the plugin:

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.varlanv.test-konvence") version "1.0.4"
}
```

The plugin will add two tasks:

1. **testKonvenceApply** - task for changing test method names to match JUnit `@DisplayName` annotation,
   and generate `@DisplayName` annotation based on method name where it doesn't yet exist.
2. **testKonvenceVerify** - task for failing build in case there are tests, for which
   test name transformation is not yet applied, either method name to `@DisplayName`, or `@DisplayName` to method name.

The plugin will also configure automatic applying of `testKonvenceApply` task after each test run.

Consider the following test class:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

After running `test` task, or running `testKonvenceApply` task, two things will be added:

1. If not already present, `import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName` import will be added
2. `@DisplayName` will be generated from test name.

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word hello")
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

Now, consider this test class:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word 'hello'")
    void should_work() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

After running `test` task, or running `testKonvenceApply` task,
since there is mismatch between what method name and what is written in `@DisplayName`,
the class will be rewritten to following:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.DisplayName;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

class StringTest {

    @Test
    @DisplayName("should contain 5 chars in word 'hello'")
    void should_contain_5_chars_in_word_hello() {
        Assertions.assertEquals(5, "hello".length());
    }
}
```

## Usage example for CI/CD pipelines

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.varlanv.test-konvence") version "1.0.4"
}

testKonvence {
    applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask(!providers.environmentVariable("CI").isPresent())
}
```

Then, somewhere in CI / CD configuration, add a step:
`./gradlew testKonvenceVerify`.

Configuring a plugin like this will make it so that developers will
have nice developer experience on local machines, with test naming
enforced on each test run. Meanwhile, the CI / CD pipeline will enforce that
test naming is always consistent and will fail the build in case a developer forgot to
apply test naming transformations.

By default, the plugin will not try to apply test naming transformations on the CI / CD server. That is, 
if environment variable "CI" is present, which is true for most major CI / CD providers 

## Configurations

Here is an exhaustive list of available configurations:

In `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
testKonvence {
    enabled(true)
    applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask(true)
    useCamelCaseForMethodNames(false)
    reverseTransformation {
        enabled(true)
    }
}
```

* **enabled** - whether to apply plugin logic. If set to **false**,
  tasks `testKonvenceApply` and `testKonvenceVerify`
  will still be created, but will have no-op action. Default is **true**.
* **applyAutomaticallyAfterTestTask** - if set to **true**, all tests will be
  automatically renamed(if needed) after `test` task. If set to **false**,
  applying test naming transformations will be available only through `testKonvenceApply` task.
  Default is **true**.
* **useCamelCaseForMethodNames** - if is to **true**, camel case method names will be used,
  instead of the default snake case. Default is **false**.
* **reverseTransformation.enabled** - if set to **true**, `@DisplayName` annotation will be
  generated based on test method name. If set to **false**, only method name transformations
  based on existing `@DisplayName` annotations will be applied. Default is **true**.

## Transformations examples

#### `@DisplayName` to snake case method name:

* **a_b_c** → _a_b_c_
* **Some good test name** → _some_good_test_name_
* **Some good test name, which has comas, dots., question? marks, and exclamation
  marks!** → _some_good_test_name_which_has_comas_dots_question_marks_and_exclamation_marks_
* **Some123good456test789name0** → _some123good456test789name0_

#### Snake case method name to `@DisplayName`:

* _when_something_then_should_something_ → **when something then should something**
* _when_call_someMethod_then_should_something_ → **when call 'someMethod' then should something**
* _someMethod_should_do_something_ → **'someMethod' should do something**
* ____someMethod___shouldDo___someThing___ → **'someMethod' 'shouldDo' 'someThing'**

## Implementation details

The plugin is working by adding an annotation processor that looks for JUnit annotations,
such as `@Test` `@ParameterizedTest`, `@DisplayName`, etc.

Information collected by the annotation processor is later used to enforce test naming
convention by looking for corresponding tests source files, looking for corresponding test
methods in source files, and applying necessary changes(if any).

Such implementation has two key points as a result:

1. The overhead added by running `testKonvenceApply` after each test run is absolutely minimal.
   No additional compilation or AST tree parsing and manipulation is done. If all of your tests
   already have stable test naming, and you introduce a new test method, only this test class and method
   will be processed.
2. If your test source file is not formatted according
   to [Java Code Conventions](https://www.oracle.com/docs/tech/java/codeconventions.pdf),
   the consistency and correctness of generated changes is not guaranteed.

## Gradle optimizations support

The plugin is built to support all the major Gradle optimization features, such as:

* [Parallel builds](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/performance.html#parallel_execution)
* [Build cache](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_cache.html)
* [Configuration cache](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/configuration_cache.html)
* [Isolated projects](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/isolated_projects.html)

## Known limitations

- Java version 11 or above for compiling test sources is required
- Only JUnit 5 is supported
- The plugin was tested with the latest Gradle 8x and 7x versions (8.14.1, 7.6.1). Any other version is not
  guaranteed to work, but in general, any version in range 7.6.1 - 8.x.x should work.

## License

Test-konvence plugin is open source software and released under [MIT License](LICENSE).
